# RFC Annotations Tool

The RFC annotations tool allows a user to view a set of RFCs with relevant annotations.
Some annotations are automatically generated (such as which RFCs update the one being viewed),
but it is also easy to create your own annotations and share them with others,
and to read RFCs annotated by many other people.
The annotated RFCs are static HTML with active links between the documents and to
other documents outside those generated by the tool.

__IMPORTANT NOTE__: This project is pre-release. We are encouraging new issues and
pull requests during August 2022, and will incorporate changes as appropriate.
Around October 2022, the project will have its first official release
(and will still be open to issues and pull requests, of course).
For now, consider this an alpha release where significant features and interfaces
may change before the final release.

This release of the RFC annotations tool is aimed at the RFCs that relate to the DNS.
All errata are shown in-line, and preliminary custom annotations include descriptions of
how each RFC is updated by others.
The primary intended audiences of this tool and the associated annotations are security researchers, DNS software developers,
and DNS protocol developers.

You can see the output of the tool for the DNS RFCs [here] (https://rfc-annotations.research.icann.org/).
You can also clone this repo and build the tool on a local system.

Although the automatically generated annotations will be useful to the intended audiences,
the expected value of the tool will be incorporating annotations from individuals.
Some examples of valuable annotations include:

- Errata placed in-line, possibly with commentary on the errata
- Notes of how an RFC is updated by other RFCs
- Instructions on how to configure open-source software to turn on protocol features
- Pointers to articles about security and/or operational issues with protocol features
- Links to mailing list discussions of interpretation of parts of RFCs
- Commentary from developers about issues they had with particular text
- Historical notes about how some features appeared in the RFCs

The generated RFCs are in HTML format with the annotations shown on the right side of the screen.
The files use standard CSS which can be modified locally to highlight particular types of
annotations or simply to suit the individual viewer's preferences.

(Special thanks go to the authors of [rfc2html](https://github.com/ietf-tools/rfc2html)
which is the basis of the HTMLization of RFCs in this tool.)

## Prerequisites

Running the tool to generate the annotated RFCs requires either [Docker](https://docker.com)
or the combination of `python3` (version 3.7 or greater) and `rsync`. `make` is mandatory if you
want to use the targets defined in the `Makefile`.

## Process Overview

The tool takes a list of target RFCs, reads the text version of the RFCs, and converts those RFCs to HTML.
The status of RFCs is fetched and turned into annotations that appear at the top of the generated RFCs.
The entire corpus of current Internet Drafts is also fetched or updated, and scanned for indications
that particular drafts intend to update or obsolete RFCs when they are eventually published as RFCs.
The complete list of errata is fetched or updated;
this is used for manual creation of annotations of the relevant errata.

The tool goes through all the annotations and incorporates them in the RFCs.
The last step in running the tool is to create the `index.html` file that has links to all the generated RFCs.

## Viewing the Annotated RFCs

The generated HTML output, including the index file, are found in the `generated-html/` directory.
The RFCs show annotations near the top that list the RFCs by which they are updated or obsoleted,
as well as an annotation with links to all the relevant errata.

Within annotations, links to RFCs that are in the set of generated RFCs lead to the generated
RFCs; links to other RFCs lead to the RFC Editor's site.

To view just the annotations in an RFC, click the "Hide RFC" button at the top right of the window.
When the RFC is hidden, to show the RFC again and jump to the location of the annotation,
click the location link at the left of the annotations's caption.

Annotations can be collapsed and expanded by clicking in the header line of the annotation.

Annotations are displayed with standard CSS. You can customize the CSS to change the way
that annotations are displayed as described below.

See the `annotations/README.md` file for instructions on how to create annotations.

## Running the Tool

The tool can be configured in many ways:

- List of RFCs that are annotated
- Javascript used to sort columns in the list of RFCs
- Sources for annotations
- CSS used to display the RFCs and annotations
- Javascript used to show and hide displayed content

All configuration is stored in the `default-config/` directory.
If you want to make local changes to the default configuration, copy the file from
the `default-config/` directory to the `local-config/` directory and edit it there.
This prevents your changes from being lost if you later do a `git pull`.
When you edit files in `local-config/`, you need to re-run the tool to download and generate the RFCs again.

### List of RFCs

The list of RFCs is stored in a file whose name follows the pattern`*-rfcs.txt`.
The tool comes with a `dns-rfcs.txt` file pre-populated with over 100 RFCs related to the DNS.
The index file that is generated has the same prefix as the input name, such as `dns-index.html`.

### Annotations

The annotations are stored in the `annotations/` directory.
Annotations that are automatically generated by the tool are put in `annotations/_generated`;
it is unlikely that you want to touch that folder.
You can add local annotations by adding subdirectories to the `annotations/` directory.

The tool will collect annotations from the sources listed in the `annotation-sources.txt` configuration file.
The default file comes with sources of DNS-related annotations created by ICANN (such as errata and updates discussion)
as well as outside sources that have told ICANN they want to be included.

See the README in the `annotations/` folder for a description of the format of the annotation files.

The tool goes through the `annotations/` directory and all subdirectories looking for files whose name
is "rfcnnnn.*" where "nnnn" matches one of the listed RFCs.
The file extension can be anything.
Any subdirectory of the `annotations/` directory that has a file called `.ignore` will be skipped
by the tool when adding annotations to the RFCs, as will subdirectories named `.git`.

### Creating the HTML Locally

The easiest way to run the tool is with `make`.

- `make clean` will remove all collected files and generated annotations (but not your own annotations).
- `make` and `make all` collect the text RFCs, Internet Drafts, status information, and errata, then generate the HTMLized RFCs.
- `make annotations` only refreshes the generated HTML by scanning the annotations directories
(`make annotations` does not create the `index.html` file).

The programs called by `make` (which are in `program/`) allow user configuration through environment variables.

- `RFC_TXT_DIR`, `RFC_OUTPUT` and `RFC_ANNOTATIONS` change the defaults of
`raw-originals/`, `generated-html/`, and `annotations/`, respectively,
- `RFC_LIST` can be used to act on a subset of RFCs.
The value is a space-separated list of numbers, such as `1035 2181`.
This can be used to speed processing, but processing all RFCs on a typical laptop is
likely fast enough.
- `RFC_INDEX` tells the tool whether to create the index file.
Generating this file can sometimes be slow, so setting `RFC_INDEX=NO`
can speed up the overall building process.
- `RFC_HTML_WARNINGS` set to `YES` tells the annotation collector to display warnings about HTML
fix-ups that it is automatically applying.

### Personal CSS and Javascript

The `css.html` configuration file controls the display of the RFCs and annotations.
Its contents are added to each generated RFC.
You can copy this to the `local-config/` directory and change the values, or add your own.

For example:
```
.area .annotation .reported {display: block; background-color: #F88;}
.area .annotation .rejected {display: block; background-color: #F88;}
.area .annotation .updated {background-color: #88F;}
```
This would display rejected and reported errata on red background (whereas they are normally not shown),
and the status of "updated" show the annotations that have on a blue background.

You can also create CSS for individual document authors, such as:
```
.area .annotation .chris_smith {font-size: 1em; background-color: #00FC90;}
```

Similarly, the `scripts.html` configuration file contains Javascript that is added to each generated RFC.

## Using Docker

If [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) is installed locally, you can run the tool
without any further prerequisites.
`make` encapsulates the commands for the build process for Docker using
targets `clean`, `docker-remove`, `docker-annotations` and `docker`.

